SDL SQL blog: historization, incremantal with CDC (#534)
smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake: blog/2022-05-11-SDL-historization/2022-05-11-historization.md

---

> title: Incremantal historization using CDC and Airbyte MSSQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Incremental historization using CDC and Airbyte MSSQL connector
```

```Bash
podman exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S mssqlserver -U sa -P '%abcd1234%' -i /config/db_mod_chess.sql
```
Note: 1680 rows were changed + 1 row deleted.

Furthermore, the data lake gets updated using the same command as above:
```Bash
podman run --hostname localhost -e SPARK_LOCAL_HOSTNAME=localhost --rm --pod sdl_sql -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/target:/mnt/lib -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config sdl-spark --config /mnt/config --feed-sel ids:histData
```

In the [Polynote (click here)](http://localhost:8192/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb) sql_data_monitor.ipynb, the data lake table can be inspected again. The table and its additional columns are presented, as well as the original and updated rows for a modified row (*id = QQ3iIM2V*) and the deleted row (*id = 009mKOEz*).

![polynote example output](historization_res.png)

## Change Data Capture

So far the whole table is collected and compared with the existing data lake table. 
Various databases support Change Data Capture (CDC). CDC already keeps track of changes similar to the comparision done by the historization feature of SDL. 

> this can be used to optimize performance of the historiation feature, gathering only database updates, reducing the amount of transferred and compared significantly. Therewith, only data changed (created, modified, or deleted) since the last synchronisation will be read from the database. It needs the status of the last synchronistation to be attached to the successful stream. This **state** is handled in SDLB. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be used to optimize performance of the historization feature, gathering only database updates, reducing the amount of transferred and compared data significantly. Therewith, only data changed (created, modified, or deleted) since the last synchronisation will be read from the database. It needs the status of the last synchronisation to be attached to the successful stream. This **state** is handled in SDLB. 
```

First the SQL server need to be configured to have a table [CDC enabled](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/track-changes/enable-and-disable-change-data-capture-sql-server?view=sql-server-ver15). Additionally to the used table *chess*, another table is created with the CDC feature enabled. This table *chess_cdc* is created by copying and deduplicating the original table. The table creation is already performed in the above introduced and used [MS SQL initalization](db_init_chess.sql) script. In practice, further SQL settings should be considered, including proper user and permissions specification, and an adaptation of the retention period (3 days default). 

Furthermore, the SQL agent need to be enabled. Therefore, the database need to be restarted (here container is restarted). This is handled in the above mentioned [restart_databases.sh](restart_databases.sh) script. If not already used above, run:

```Bash
bash restart_databases.sh
```

Let's double check the CDC enabled table:

```Bash
podman exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S mssqlserver -U sa -P '%abcd1234%' -Q "SELECT * FROM foobar.cdc.dbo_chess_cdc_CT where id = '079kHDqh'"
```

> Here the first 5 columns are added for the CDC. Here, only *id* and *victory_status* are selected from the original table. The other columns originating from the related CDC tables. 

Reviewer: I understand that the first 5 columns are added through CDC. But the rest is from the original table, and not only id and victory_status, isn't it?

Author: Ohh yes. Originally, I only selected few representative columns, but changed the afterwards, while missing to change the text. Thanks, for the catch.

> It should be noted that CDC additional data vary from implementation to implementation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should be noted that CDC additional data vary by implementation from different DB products.
```

### Airbyte MSSQL connector

> Since the implemented JDBC (used above) does not support CDC data, the connector is changed to [Airbyte MSSQL](https://docs.airbyte.com/integrations/sources/mssql). In contrast to the article [Using Airbyte connector to inspect github data](../blog/2022-03-18-SDL-airbyte/2022-03-18-SDL-airbyte.md), where Airbyte github connector ran as python script, here the connector runs as a container within the SDLB container. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Sparks JDBC data source (used above) does not support CDC data, the connector is changed to [Airbyte MSSQL](https://docs.airbyte.com/integrations/sources/mssql). In contrast to the article [Using Airbyte connector to inspect github data](../blog/2022-03-18-SDL-airbyte/2022-03-18-SDL-airbyte.md), where Airbyte github connector ran as python script, here the connector runs as a container within the SDLB container. 
```

> I targeted a setup using: WSL2, SDLB with podman, and the Airbyte container with podman in the SDLB container. Unfortunately, there are issues with fuse overlay. Therefore, I switched to [buildah](https://buildah.io/) in the SDLB container. Unfortunately, the entrypoint is not recognized as expected. As a workaround the following script corrects this. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I targeted a setup using: WSL2, SDLB with podman, and the Airbyte container with podman in the SDLB container. Unfortunately, there are issues with fuse overlay filesystem when using container in container with podman. Therefore, I switched to [buildah](https://buildah.io/) in the SDLB container. Unfortunately, the entrypoint is not recognized as expected. As a workaround the following script corrects this. 
```

#### DataObject
As a source object the AirbyteDataObject is used. Again the MSSQL server with the user credentials are specified. Further, in the streamName the table is selected. The cmd specifies how to run Airbyte. Here the mentioned workaround script is called in the container. As target, again a Delta Lake table is chosen, here called `int_chess_cdc`. Practically, we would prevent of duplicating tables, here we create a new one to provide the possibility to compare both results. 
```hocon
dataObjects {
    ext-chess-cdc {
    type = AirbyteDataObject
    config = {
      host = "mssqlserver"
      port = 1433
      database = "foobar"
      username = "sa"
      password = "%abcd1234%"
      replication_method = "CDC"
    },
    streamName = "chess_cdc",
    cmd = {
      type = DockerRunScript
      name = "airbyte_source-mssql"
      image = "airbyte-mssql"
      linuxDockerCmd = "bash /mnt/config/start_buildah.sh"
    }
  }
  int-chess-cdc {
    type = DeltaLakeTableDataObject
    path = "~{id}"
    table {
      db = "default"
      name = "int_chess_cdc"
      primaryKey = [id]
    }
  }
}
```
#### Action

> Again the SDLB action *HistorizeAction* with *mergeModeEnabled* is selected. Further, the incremental execution mode is enabled. With CDC we get only changed data, which will be merged with the SDL existing table. Further, the column and value need to be specified to identify deleted data points. Depending on the CDC implementation this could be the deletion date (like we have here) or an operation flag mentioning the deletion operation as code, or even differently. SDLB expects a fixed value for deletion, why we here specify an `AdditionalColumnsTransformer` transformer to first create an intermediate column mapping any date to *true*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again the SDLB action *HistorizeAction* with *mergeModeEnabled* is selected. Further, the incremental execution mode is enabled. With CDC we get only changed data, which will be merged with the SDL existing table. Further, the column and value need to be specified to identify deleted data points. Depending on the CDC implementation this could be the deletion date (like we have here) or an operation flag mentioning the deletion operation as code, or even differently. SDLB expects a fixed value for deletion. That's why we specify an `AdditionalColumnsTransformer` transformer to first create an intermediate column mapping any date to *true*. 
```

```hocon
actions {
  histDataAirbyte {
    type = HistorizeAction
    mergeModeEnable = true
    executionMode = { type = DataObjectStateIncrementalMode }
    inputId = ext-chess-cdc
    outputId = int-chess-cdc
    mergeModeCDCColumn = "cdc_deleted"
    mergeModeCDCDeletedValue = true
    transformers = [{
      type = AdditionalColumnsTransformer
      additionalDerivedColumns = {cdc_deleted = "_ab_cdc_deleted_at is not null"}
    }]
    metadata {
      feed = download
    }
  }
}
```

> Finally, SDLB is launched using the same settings as above, now with the feed `ids:histDataAirbyte` and the specifying the *state* directory and name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, SDLB is launched using the same settings as above, now with the feed `ids:histDataAirbyte` and specifying the *state* directory and name:
```

```Bash
podman run --hostname localhost -e SPARK_LOCAL_HOSTNAME=localhost --rm --pod sdl_sql -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/target:/mnt/lib -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config sdl-spark --config /mnt/config --feed-sel ids:histDataAirbyte --state-path /mnt/data/state -n SDL_sql
```
Again the SQL database modification is processed using [config/db_mod_chess_cdc.sql](db_mod_chess_cdc.sql): 
```Bash
podman exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S mssqlserver -U sa -P '%abcd1234%' -i /config/db_mod_chess_cdc.sql
```
And the SDL update with the same command as just used:
```Bash
podman run --hostname localhost -e SPARK_LOCAL_HOSTNAME=localhost --rm --pod sdl_sql -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/target:/mnt/lib -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config sdl-spark --config /mnt/config --feed-sel ids:histDataAirbyte --state-path /mnt/data/state -n SDL_sql
```

Again the delta lake tables can be inspected using [Polynote (click here)](http://localhost:8192/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb).

## Summary

> Smart Data Lake Builder (SDLB) provides a powerful too to capture data from SQL databases and provides features to track changes. As well as optimized procedures to process Change Data Capture (CDC) data. There are various connectors to interact with SQL databases (e.g. JDBC and Airbyte). Powerful transformers help to handle the data stream within the action, e.g. for deduplication. Furthermore, the join, and merge of new data with existing tables, as well as the writing of the data is optimized, reducing the computational an IO efforts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart Data Lake Builder (SDLB) provides a powerful tool to capture data from SQL databases and provides features to track changes, as well as optimized procedures to process Change Data Capture (CDC) data. There are various connectors to interact with SQL databases (e.g. JDBC and Airbyte). Powerful transformers help to handle the data stream within the action, e.g. for deduplication. Furthermore, the join and merge of new data with existing tables, as well as the writing of the data is optimized, reducing the computational an IO efforts with standard HistorizeAction. 
```
